---
title: "Effectiveness of a culturally tailored HIV intervention in promoting PrEP among Black women who use drugs in community supervision programs in New York City: A randomized clinical trial."
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/Effectiveness of a culturally tailored HIV intervention in promoting PrEP among Black women who use drugs in community supervision programs in New York City: A randomized clinical trial.
excerpt: 'Abstract: 
Background
In the U.S. there are significant racial and gender disparities in the uptake of pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP). Black Americans represented 14% of PrEP users in 2022, but accounted for 42% of new HIV diagnoses in 2021 and in the South, Black people represented 48% of new HIV diagnoses in 2021 but only 21% of PrEP users in 2022. Women who use drugs may be even less likely than women who do not use drugs have initiated PrEP. Moreover, women involved in community supervision programs (CSP) are less likely to initiate or use PrEP, More PrEP interventions that focus on Black women with recent history of drug use in CSPs are needed to reduce inequities in PrEP uptake.
Methods
We conducted a secondary analysis from a randomized clinical trial with a sub-sample (n = 336) of the total (N = 352) participants from the parent study (E-WORTH), who tested HIV negative at baseline were considered PrEP-eligible. Black women were recruited from CSPs in New York City (NYC), with recent substance use. Participants were randomized to either E-WORTH (n = 172) an HIV testing plus, receive a 5-session, culturally-tailored, group-based HIV prevention intervention, versus an HIV testing control group (n = 180). The 5 sessions included an introduction to PrEP and access. This paper reports outcomes on improved awareness of PrEP, willingness to use PrEP, and PrEP uptake over the 12-month follow-up period. HIV outcomes are reported in a previous paper.
Results
Compared to control participants, participants in this study assigned to E-WORTH had significantly greater odds of being aware of PrEP as a biomedical HIV prevention strategy (OR = 3.25, 95% CI = 1.64–6.46, p = 0.001), and indicated a greater willingness to use PrEP as an HIV prevention method (b = 0.19, 95% CI = 0.06–0.32, p = 0.004) over the entire 12-month follow-up period.
Conclusions
These findings underscore the effectiveness of a culturally-tailored intervention for Black women in CSP settings in increasing awareness, and intention to initiate PrEP. Low uptake of PrEP in both arms highlight the need for providing more robust PrEP-on-demand strategies that are integrated into other services such as substance abuse treatment.
Trial Registration
ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02391233.'
date: 2024-07-23
venue: 'Addiction Science & Clinical Practice'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1186/s13722-024-00488-0'
citation: 'Goddard-Eckrich, D., McCrimmon, T., Bond, K., Chang, M., Hunt, T., Hall, J., Russo, M., Ramesh, V., Johnson, K. A., Downey, D. L., Wu, E., El-Bassel, N., & Gilbert, L. (2024). Effectiveness of a culturally tailored HIV intervention in promoting PrEP among Black women who use drugs in community supervision programs in New York City: A randomized clinical trial. Addiction Science & Clinical Practice, 19(1), 55.'
---

The contents above will be part of a list of publications, if the user clicks the link for the publication than the contents of section will be rendered as a full page, allowing you to provide more information about the paper for the reader. When publications are displayed as a single page, the contents of the above "citation" field will automatically be included below this section in a smaller font.
